Title: Worklog 2015-01-10
Date: 2015-01-11 03:51

Okay, I was so frantic about the language updates and
went to (mostly) the library maintenance mode.
If you saw `encoding` or `chrono` from [crates.io] a lot,
that's because I tended to update per *each* breaking nightly.

Anyways, we've finally got [1.0.0 alpha] and
I can finally refrain from simply keeping libraries up.
I'm now working on Chrono 0.2, which will have a new `Offset` design.

[crates.io]: https://crates.io/
[1.0.0 alpha]: http://blog.rust-lang.org/2015/01/09/Rust-1.0-alpha.html

## Grisu and rust-strconv

By the way, what happened to [rust-strconv]?
In the previous (i.e. 3 week old) post
I've said the initial version of Grisu can be released within a week.
That was a serious misprediction and it actually took [two full weeks].

[rust-strconv]: https://github.com/lifthrasiir/rust-strconv/
[two full weeks]: https://github.com/lifthrasiir/rust-strconv/commit/81e4f157b90191ef335c2ad692e7ebd34221a367

Grisu by itself is a simple algorithm to understand.
It first scales the input into a certain convenient range
(while keeping the exponent, obviously),
so that the range can be easily fit to `u64`.
It then maintains two approximate ranges
for the actual range in which values would round to that number;
one overestimates, another underestimates.
Quoting the diagram in the comments:

~~~~
        +- actual range of minus
  | <---|---------------------- unsafe region --------------------------> |
  |     |                                                                 |
  |  |<--->|  | <--------------- safe region ---------------> |           |
  |  |     |  |                                               |           |
  |1 ulp|1 ulp|                 |1 ulp|1 ulp|                 |1 ulp|1 ulp|
  |<--->|<--->|                 |<--->|<--->|                 |<--->|<--->|
  |-----|-----|-------...-------|-----|-----|-------...-------|-----|-----|
  |   minus   |                 |     v     |                 |   plus    |
minus1     minus0           v - 1 ulp   v + 1 ulp           plus0       plus1
~~~~

Both the scaled value and ranges are repeatedly narrowed down
until we are out of significant digits.
(There is one important inequality proved in the paper
which can be used to quickly test this.)
At this stage we have *one* possible shortest representation,
so we try other representations to find the shortest representation
which is also closest to the actual value.
Finally, we can verify that it actually is in the underestimated range
so we can safely return it.
Each step has its own rounding error,
but it is well characterized so we account for that.

The problem with implementing Grisu is not the complexity;
it's rather an analysis, which is very unwieldy to understand.
For example, the implementation shouldn't overflow,
and Grisu code actively avoids that,
but both the paper and the [code][fast-dtoa] is shallow in details.
The code has an extensive documentation, but not a proof,
and it is very hard to be sure on edge cases.
At the end, it took almost a month to fully understand and write
[every required constraint][format_shortest_opt] in implementations down.
Frankly speaking, my comments wouldn't really help anyway
if you are to write your own reimplementation of Grisu,
but at least it should guide potential reviewers.

[fast-dtoa]: https://github.com/v8/v8-git-mirror/blob/master/src/fast-dtoa.cc
[format_shortest_opt]: https://github.com/lifthrasiir/rust-strconv/blob/5cbbb53/src/flt2dec/strategy/grisu.rs#L212-L476

Fortunately, my attempt has paid off.
Combined with Dragon it swiftly overshadows the original naive implementation
both in the performance (up to 1000x faster) and the accuracy.
I've exhaustively verified that
Grisu for `f32` returns the same result as Dragon when it does give a result.
Just out of curiosity, I've also counted how many `f32` does return `None`;
there are precisely 17,763,160 such values out of 2,139,095,039 finite values.
I have some idea for improving on severe cases [^1]
but that would be another story.

[^1]: In the worst case, 50% of 2^23 `f32` values between 2^21 and 2^22
      return `None` (it's 0.8% in the full range, for comparison).
      This is mostly because Grisu's inability to handle
      the exact halfway cases very common to that range.
      Note that this range is relatively close to 1 (than many others),
      so it can impact the real world performance of Grisu.

There are two more possible modes of floating point printing.
Grisu-like algorithm can be used to quickly try to print
a predefined number of significant digits
or up to certain number of digits after a decimal point if possible.
I have a working code to do the former (with an informal proof in progress),
but it seems not to fit well to the common interface shared by Dragon.
The common interface can notify that the following digits are zeroes,
but it is not very obvious that Grisu can report `None` in that case.
(Grisu cannot really give the exact answer in this case.)
I'm currently studying the C implementation for possible resolution.

